Is the UK government closing the door on migrant workers?
On March 14, the Home Office, the UK Government Department responsible for delivering immigration policy, published a highly consequential statement about changes to the UK immigration rules. It confirmed increases to the minimum earnings threshold for those arriving to Britain on the Skilled Worker visa route. The threshold rose by 48% from £26,200 to £38,700. The minimum income requirement for family or partner/spouse visas also increased from £18,600 to £29,000.
The Skilled Worker salary threshold changes come into force on April 4, while the family visa changes take effect from 11 April. They are part of the Government’s plans to reduce family, study and work-related immigration, which was first announced in December last year.

For those unable to meet the new £29,000 threshold for a family/partner visa, there may be some leeway as the Home Office recognises the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.

The statement explains: “Those unable to meet the minimum income requirement may still be granted leave where there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with their partner continuing outside the UK, or where it would not be reasonable for their child to leave the UK, or where there are exceptional circumstances which would render refusal of the application a breach of ECHR Article 8.”

The implications of these changes for Indian workers hoping to find middle-ranking jobs in Britain are profound.

And the statement included confirmation of more restrictions. The shortage occupation list (SOL) is a list of jobs where manpower shortages are particularly problematic. To attract overseas workers to fill these roles, employers are able to pay migrants applying for work in these jobs at 80% of the usual going rate.

The list covers a wide range of sectors including health, education, social care and construction. It is designed to make it easier for employers to fill vacancies where there is a shortage of workers in the UK.

However, it is feared that employers with jobs on the list have been using the system to keep wages low, undercutting British workers in favour of cheaper foreign labour.

In order to stop this practice, it was also announced that as of March 14 the 20 per cent salary discount for those skilled workers employed in shortage occupations will come to an end. A new list, to be known as the immigration salary list, will replace the shortage occupation list in early April 2024.

For those outside the UK reading about these changes, it can seem like the door is closing on migrant workers, but this is not the case.

The UK is still open for business and is still a welcoming country for people with the right skills who want to work in skilled jobs. Crucially health and care workers who account for almost half of people on UK work visas are exempt from the salary threshold increase.

People on national pay scales, such as teachers, are also exempt. The Migration Observatory, which is the independent body that advises the British government on immigration policy, says the main impact of the changes is likely to be on middle-skilled jobs like butchers or chefs, where pay tends to be less than £30,000.

In sectors such as IT, web design and construction, there are still opportunities for skilled workers because the average wages remain above the new minimum threshold, and most importantly, these sectors are still experiencing worker shortages.

Surprisingly, in Britain between October and December 2023 there were 2.8 million people aged 16 to 64 who were economically inactive as a result of long-term sickness. While this may appear a small number to people in India, in the UK it represents a significant percentage of the working age population.

The UK government is trying to introduce measures to coax these people back into work. Until it does, there are still lots of unfilled jobs, many of which qualify for work visas. The country still relies on migrant workers and remains a land of opportunity for people with the right skills.